---
title: Notes on topology, part 2: Bases and other things
tags: math, topology
---

## Bases

One important notion for topological spaces is **bases**. The idea is that a **base** is a collection of *primitive* open sets that is used to generate the rest of the topology. It is often more convenient to describe the base for a topology than the topology itself.

Formally, a **base** $\mathcal{B}$ for the topological space $

The definition is any collection $\mathcal{B}$ of subsets of $X$ such that

    - $\bigcup \mathcal{B} = X$
    - for all $A, B \in \mathcal{B}$, $A \cap B$ is a union of elements in $\mathcal{B}$.

The **topology on $X$ induced by basis $\mathcal{B}$** is defined by

$$\mathcal{T} := \{ \bigcup \mathcal{S} : \mathcal{S} \subseteq \mathcal{B} \}$$

$\mathcal{T}$ is a topology because:

 - $\emptyset \in \mathcal{T}$ (consider $\bigcup \emptyset$)
 - $X \in \mathcal{T}$ because $\bigcup \mathcal{B} = X$ ($\mathcal{B}$ is a basis)
 - If $\{U_i\}$ is any collection of sets in $\mathcal{T}$, then each $U_i$ is a union of basis elements (by definition of $\mathcal{T}$)
 - so that $\bigcup_i U_i$ is a union of basis elements and hence in $\mathcal{T}$.
 - Finally, for any $A, B \in \mathcal{T}$, $A = \bigcup_i A_i$ and $B = \bigcup_j B_j$ for some basis elements $A_i, B_j$
 - and, by distributivity, $(\bigcup_i A_i) \cap (\bigcup_j B_j) = \bigcup_i \bigcup_j A_i \cap B_j$
 - but each $A_i \cap B_j$ is a union of basis elements, so $A \cap B$ is a union of basis elements.
 - which proves $A \cap B \in \mathcal{T}$.


Let $X$ be some set. It also happens to be true that if $\mathcal{C}$ is any arbitrary collection of subsets of $X$, and we define

$$\mathcal{T} := \{ \bigcup \mathcal{S} : \mathcal{S} \subseteq \mathcal{C} \}$$

then for $\mathcal{T}$ to be a topology, it must be the case that $\mathcal{C}$ is a basis.

The prove it, note that for every such $\mathcal{C}$, regardless of whether $\mathcal{T}$ is a topology, it is true that

 - $\mathcal{T}$ contains the empty set
 - $\mathcal{T}$ is closed under arbitrary unions

Now if we assume $\mathcal{T}$ is a topology, then it must also be true that:

 - $X \in \mathcal{T}$, i.e. that $X = \bigcup \mathcal{S}$ for some $\mathcal{S} \subseteq \mathcal{C}$, which implies that $\mathcal{C}$ covers $X$.
 - for any $A, B \in \mathcal{C}$, $A \cap B$ \in \mathcal{T}$, so it's a union of sets in $\mathcal{C}


## Homeomorphism basis

I don't know what to call this, the **homeomorphism basis**? If $X$ and $Y$ are spaces and $f: X \to Y$ is a homeomorphism, and $\mathcal{B}$ is a basis for the topology on $X$, then

$$f(\mathcal{B}) := \{f(B) : B \in \mathcal{B}\}$$

is a basis for the topology on $Y$. To prove that $f(\mathcal{B})$ is a basis for the topology on $Y$, it suffices to prove a) that $f(\mathcal{B})$ is a collection of open subsets in $Y$ (which is true by definition), and b) that every $V$ open in $Y$ is the union of sets in $f(\mathcal{B})$, which can be seen by noting that $f^{pre}(V)$ is open in $X$, so $f^{pre}(V) = \bigcup_i B_i$ for some $B_i$'s in $\mathcal{B}$, so $V = \bigcup_i f(B_i)$.

## Second-countable spaces

A space is **second-countable** if it has a countable (finite or countably infinite) basis.

Being second-countable is a topological property. That is, if $X$ and $Y$ are homeomorphic, then $X$ is second-countable iff $Y$ is. This can be immediately seen by using the homeomorphism basis: if we have a countable basis for $X$, then we immediately have one for $Y$ as well.


## Coarseness/fineness of topologies

If $X$ is a set and $\mathcal{S}$ and $\mathcal{T}$ are topologies on $X$ such that every open set in $\mathcal{S}$ is an open set in $\mathcal{T}$, then $\mathcal{S}$ is said to be **coarser** than $\mathcal{T}$, and $\mathcal{T}$ **finer** than $\mathcal{S}$.

The coarsest topology on any set $X$ is the **trivial topology** $\{ \emptyset, X\}$, while the finest topology, the power set of $X$, is called the **discrete topology**.

Here's an interesting characterization of the coarseness/fineness relation: $\mathcal{S}$ is coarser than $\mathcal{T}$ iff the identity map $id: X \to X$ is a homeomorphism when considered as a map

$$(X, \mathcal{T}) \to (X, \mathcal{S})$$

between topological spaces.


## Basic separation axioms

### Hausdorff spaces

A sufficient (but not necessary) condition for ensuring uniqueness of limits for sequences in a topological space is the **Hausdorff** property. This property says that any two distinct points in a topological space have disjoint neighborhoods. Any space with this property is called a **Hausdorff space**. This ensures uniqueness of limits since two tail sequences of one sequence could not be contained in two disjoint sets (the smaller of the tail sequences would have to be contained in two disjoint sets, which is clearly not possible).

Hausdorff-ness is a topological property: If $X$ and $Y$ are homeomorphic, then $X$ is Hausdorff iff $Y$ is. To see this, if $f: X \to Y$ is a homeomorphism and $X$ is Hausdorff, for any $u, v \in Y$, then $a := f^{-1}(u)$ and $b := f^{-1}(v)$ are in $X$, so they have neighborhoods $U_x$ and $V_y$, respectively, that are disjoint. Then $f(U_x)$ and $f(V_y)$ are neighborhoods of $u$ and $v$, respectively, and they must be disjoint since if $z = f(c) = f(d)$ for some $c \in U_x, d \in V_y$, then $f$ is not bijective.

TODO: An example of a non-Hausdorff space where limits are unique.

### $T_1$ spaces

Another separation axiom that has come up: A space is $T_1$ if for any pair of distinct points $a$ and $b$, there are neighborhoods $U$ and $V$ of $a$ and $b$, respectively, such that $U$ doesn't contain $b$ and $V$ doesn't contain $a$. Clearly Hausdorff spaces are $T_1$, since they actually impose a stronger condition: that the neighborhoods are *disjoint*.

A space $X$ is $T_1$ iff singleton sets are closed. If $T_1$, for any $x$ and any $y \neq x$, there is a neighborhood $U_y$ of $y$ that does not contain $x$ by the $T_1$ property, so the union of them all is $X - x$ and is open since it is a union of open sets. (Alternate proof: if $\{x\}$ is not closed, there is some $a \neq x$ and every neighborhood of $a$ contains $x$, contradicting $T_1$). Conversely, if all singletons are closed, then for $x \neq y$, $X - x$ is a neighborhood of $y$ and $X - y$ is a neighborhood of $x$, and these mutually exclude each other.

$T_1$ spaces do not necessarily have the unique limits property. TODO: example. Finite complement topology on $\mathbb{N}$?

### A lemma

In a $T_1$ space, if $a$ is a limit point of some subset $S$, then for any neighborhood $U$ of $a$ there must be infinitely many points distinct from $a$ that are in $U \cap S$, because if there are only finitely many, we can find a neighborhood of $a$ that does not intersect $S - a$, contradicting that it's a limit point.

