---
title: Notes on probability, part 3: Measurable functions
---

Previously: [part 1][part1], [part 2][part2]

The last post was about some of the basic properties of probability measures. In this post we'll switch gears a bit and talk about functions between [measurable spaces][part1]. This is ultimately useful for the definition of a random variable.

## The preimage map

First, a bit of set theory to get us going: if $X$ and $Y$ are sets and $f: X \to Y$ is a function, then $f$ can automatically induce a function

$$f^{pre}: \text{Pow } Y \to \text{Pow } X$$

I don't know of a standard name for it. I'll refer to it as the *preimage map induced by $f$* (or just *preimage map*).

The preimage map is wonderfully well-behaved. It preserves (prove it if you like):

 - complements
 - arbitrary unions
 - arbitrary intersections

This implies that whenever $\mathcal{B}$ is some $\sigma$-algebra for $Y$, then the set

$$f^{pre}[\mathcal{B}] := \{f^{pre}(S) : S \in \mathcal{B}\}$$

is a $\sigma$-algebra for $X$.

## Measurable functions

Recall that when we say $(X, \mathcal{A})$ is a measurable space, we mean that $X$ is a set and $\mathcal{A}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra on $X$.

If $(X, \mathcal{A})$ and $(Y, \mathcal{B})$ are measurable spaces, a function $f: X \to Y$ is said to be **$(\mathcal{A}, \mathcal{B})$-measurable function** (or just **measurable** when $\mathcal{A}$ and $\mathcal{B}$ are known) when $f^{pre}(V) \in \mathcal{A}$ for all $V \in \mathcal[B}$. In other words, $f$ is measurable whenever $f^{pre}[\mathcal{B}]$ is a sub-$\sigma$-algebra of $\mathcal{A}$.

Measurable functions are structure-preserving functions between measurable spaces (similar to how linear and continuous functions are structure-preserving maps between vector spaces and topological] spaces, respectively). As with many (all?) structure-preserving maps, the composition of two measurable functions is again a measurable function. The proof is not too hard, so I'll omit it here.

## A sufficient condition

Here we look at a useful sufficient condition for the measurability of a function.

If $(X, \mathcal{A})$ and $(Y, \mathcal{B})$ are measurable spaces, $f: X \to Y$ is a function, and $\mathcal{S}$ is a collection of subsets of $Y$ that generates $\mathcal{B}$, then $f$ is measurable if $f^{pre}(S) \in \mathcal{A}$ for every $S \in \mathcal{S}$. The reason is that the collection

$$Z[\mathcal{A}, f] := \{U \subseteq Y : f^{pre}(U) \in \mathcal{A}\}$$

is a $\sigma$-algebra for $Y$ (due to the properties of the pre-image), and by hypothesis $\mathcal{S} \subseteq Z[\mathcal{A}, f]$. This implies that $\mathcal{B} \subseteq Z[\mathcal{A}, f]$, so $f$ is measurable.


### A corollary

One corollary of the sufficient condition that was just introduced is that any continuous function $f: X \to Y$ between topological spaces is measurable between the corresponding Borel spaces on $X$ and $Y$. This follows immediately from the definition of continuity.


## The Borel algebra on $\mathbb{R}$

Before we can talk about random variables, it will be helpful to discuss some ways to generate the Borel algebra on $\mathbb{R}$.

$\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$, the Borel algebra on $\mathbb{R}$, is identically the $\sigma$-algebra generated by each of these collections:

 1. the collection $X_1$ of all closed subsets of $\mathbb{R}$
 2. the collection $X_2$ of all intervals in $\mathbb{R}$ of the form $(-\infty, b]$ for $b \in \mathbb{R}$

*Proof:* Not too tough, actually. $\sigma X_1 = \mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$ because $\sigma$-algebras are closed under complements and the complement of any open/closed set is closed/open (respectively).

Also, $X_2 \subseteq X_1$ because every interval $(\infty, b]$ is closed, so $\sigma X_2 \subseteq \sigma X_1$.

Finally, to prove the converse, note that for any $a < b$, $(a, \infty) \in \sigma X_2$ (it is the complement of $(-\infty, a]$), so $(a, b] = (a, \infty) \cap (-\infty, b]$ is in $\sigma X_2$. Hence since

$$(a, b) = \bigcup_{n = 1}^{\infty} (a, b - \frac{1}{n}]$$

we have that $(a, b) \in \sigma X_2$ for all $a < b$. It is a theorem from topology that every open subset of $\mathbb{R}$ is a countable union of disjoint open intervals, which completes the proof that $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R}) \subseteq \sigma X_2$.


## So what about random variables

Here's the definition of a random variable from Grimmett and Stirzaker's book *Probability and Random Processes* (slightly altered):

 > A **random variable** is a function $X: \Omega \to \mathbb{R} with the property that $\{\omega \in \Omega : X(\omega) \leq a\} \in \mathcal{A}$ for each $a \in \mathbb{R}$. Such a function is said to be $\mathcal{A}$-measurable.

So you can see that a random variable is just a measurable function from any measurable space into the Borel space on $\mathcal{R}$. Notice how $\{\omega \in \Omega : X(\omega) \leq a\}$ is just the preimage, under $X$, of the set $(-\infty, a]$. This condition suffices, as explained above, because the intervals $(-\infty a]$ generate $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$. So there should be no mystery about why random variables are defined the way they are.


[part1]: /entries/2015-04-27-probability-1.html
[part2]: /entries/2015-05-11-probability-2.html
