---
title: Notes on topology, part 2: Bases, continuous maps and other things
tags: math, topology
---

In [part 1][part-1] I attempted to briefly motivate the study of topological spaces, and then covered some of the basic terminology in the field. There is more to cover, however.

## Limit points / isolated points

A **limit point** of a set $S$ is some point $x \in X$ such that every neighborhood of $x$ intersects $S$ in some point $a \neq x$. This definition is designed to exclude the **isolated points** of $S$, which are points $x$ in $S$ for which some neighborhood $U$ contains no other point of $S$ except $x$.

### Relation to closure/interior points.

Isolated points are by definition closure points, but they may either be interior points or boundary points depending on the set and the topology.

For example, in $\mathbb{R}^2$ under the Euclidean topology, the set $A = B(0; 1) \cup \{(5, 0)\}$ has $(5, 0)$ as an isolated point of $A$, and it is clearly a boundary point of $A$.

On the other hand, consider any discrete space. Every subset is open (so all points in a set are interior points), but every point is an isolated point (singletons are open sets).

TODO: can we find a single topology where one set has an isolated boundary point, and another set has an isolated interior point? What about a single set that has isolated boundary and isolated interior points?

Limit points are similarly closure points, but they may again either be interior points or boundary points.

Take the example of $\mathbb{R}$ with the standard topology. Then the set $(-1, 1)$ has $1$ as an limit point that is a boundary point, and $0$ as an limit point that is an interior point.

### Corollary: Sets without limit points are closed

The previous note shows that limit points are not necessarily in the set, unlike isolated points. More generally, any boundary point of a set $A$ that is not contained in $A$ is necessarily an limit point. This means that a set without limit points must contain every boundary point, and so is closed.

### Partitioning the closure

 Every closure point is either an isolated point or an limit point. If it's not in the set, it must be a boundary point and hence an limit point. If it's in the set, then it is either an limit point or an isolated point.

This implies that the closure is the disjoint union of the isolated points and the limit points.


## Coarseness/fineness of topologies

If $X$ is a set and $\mathcal{S}$ and $\mathcal{T}$ are topologies on $X$ such that every open set in $\mathcal{S}$ is an open set in $\mathcal{T}$, then $\mathcal{S}$ is said to be **coarser** than $\mathcal{T}$, and $\mathcal{T}$ **finer** than $\mathcal{S}$.

The coarsest topology on any set $X$ is the **trivial topology** $\{ \emptyset, X\}$, while the finest topology, the power set of $X$, is called the **discrete topology**.

## Continuous maps

A **continuous map** is any function $f: X \to Y$ (where $X$ and $Y$ are topological spaces) such that every open $V \subseteq Y$ has $f^{pre}(V)$ open in $X$. To be completely accurate, letting $\mathcal{S}$ be $X$'s topology and $\mathcal{T}$ be $Y$'s topology, a continuous map is a map between topological spaces

$$f: (X, \mathcal{S}) \to (Y, \mathcal{T})$$

Note this means that a given set function $f: X \to Y$ may be continuous when $X$ and $Y$ are given some pair of topologies, but may fail te be continuous under another pair of topologies.

For example, if $\mathcal{S}, \mathcal{T}$ are two topologies on $X$, then $\mathcal{S}$ is coarser than $\mathcal{T}$ iff the identity map $id: X \to X$ is a continuous map

$$(X, \mathcal{T}) \to (X, \mathcal{S})$$

(This follows immediately from the definition of continuity).

### Other equivalent definitions

There's a bunch of equivalent definitions for continuous maps. Here are three. Let $f: X \to Y$ be a map between topological spaces. Then $f$ is continuous exactly when either of these hold:

 1. For every $x \in X$ and any neighborhood $V$ of $f(x)$ in $Y$, there is a neighborhood $U$ of $x$ such that $f(U) \subseteq V$.
 2. $f^{pre}(C)$ is closed for every $C$ closed in $Y$
 3. For any $A \subseteq X$, $f$ maps closure points of $A$ to closure points of $f(A)$.

If (1) is true, for any open $V$ in $Y$, either there is some $x \in X$ such that $f(x) \in V$, or $f^{pre}(V) = \emptyset$ and is hence open. In the former case by hypothesis there is some neighborhood of $x$ contained in $f^{pre}(V)$, so this set is open, proving $f$ is continuous. The converse is proved by noting that for every $x \in X$ and neighborhood $V$ of $f(x)$, $f^{pre}(V)$ is an open neighborhood of $x$ that works.

For (2), note that $f^{pre}(Y - S) = X - f^{pre}(S)$ for any $S \subseteq Y$. So if preimages of open sets are all open, then so are preimages of closed sets, and vice versa.

For (3), if $f$ is continuous and $A \subseteq X$, if $z$ is a closure point of $A$ such that $f(z)$ isn't a closure point of $f(A)$, then $f(z)$ has a neighborhood $V$ that is disjoint from $f(A)$. So $f^{pre}(V)$ is a neighborhood of $z$ by continuity, and it must not intersect $A$, since if it contained some $a \in A$, $f(a)$ would be in $V \cap f(A)$. But we assumed $z$ was a closure point, so it must intersect $A$. Conversely, if (3) holds and $C$ is closed in $Y$, every closure point of $f^{pre}(C)$ gets mapped into a closure point of $f(f^{pre}(C)) \subseteq C$, hence a closure point of $C$. $C$ being closed, this proves that $f^{pre}(C)$ contains its closure, so is closed.

### Homeomorphism

If $f$ is bijective, continuous, with continuous inverse, it is called a **homeomorphism**. This is the notion of isomorphism for topological spaces.


## Bases

One important notion for topological spaces is **bases**. The idea is that a **base** is a collection of *primitive* open sets that is used to generate the rest of the topology. It is often more convenient to describe the base for a topology than the topology itself.

Formally, a **base** $\mathcal{B}$ for the topological space $

The definition is any collection $\mathcal{B}$ of subsets of $X$ such that

    - $\bigcup \mathcal{B} = X$
    - for all $A, B \in \mathcal{B}$, $A \cap B$ is a union of elements in $\mathcal{B}$.

The **topology on $X$ induced by basis $\mathcal{B}$** is defined by

$$\mathcal{T} := \{ \bigcup \mathcal{S} : \mathcal{S} \subseteq \mathcal{B} \}$$

$\mathcal{T}$ is a topology because:

 - $\emptyset \in \mathcal{T}$ (consider $\bigcup \emptyset$)
 - $X \in \mathcal{T}$ because $\bigcup \mathcal{B} = X$ ($\mathcal{B}$ is a basis)
 - If $\{U_i\}$ is any collection of sets in $\mathcal{T}$, then each $U_i$ is a union of basis elements (by definition of $\mathcal{T}$)
 - so that $\bigcup_i U_i$ is a union of basis elements and hence in $\mathcal{T}$.
 - Finally, for any $A, B \in \mathcal{T}$, $A = \bigcup_i A_i$ and $B = \bigcup_j B_j$ for some basis elements $A_i, B_j$
 - and, by distributivity, $(\bigcup_i A_i) \cap (\bigcup_j B_j) = \bigcup_i \bigcup_j A_i \cap B_j$
 - but each $A_i \cap B_j$ is a union of basis elements, so $A \cap B$ is a union of basis elements.
 - which proves $A \cap B \in \mathcal{T}$.


Let $X$ be some set. It also happens to be true that if $\mathcal{C}$ is any arbitrary collection of subsets of $X$, and we define

$$\mathcal{T} := \{ \bigcup \mathcal{S} : \mathcal{S} \subseteq \mathcal{C} \}$$

then for $\mathcal{T}$ to be a topology, it must be the case that $\mathcal{C}$ is a basis.

The prove it, note that for every such $\mathcal{C}$, regardless of whether $\mathcal{T}$ is a topology, it is true that

 - $\mathcal{T}$ contains the empty set
 - $\mathcal{T}$ is closed under arbitrary unions

Now if we assume $\mathcal{T}$ is a topology, then it must also be true that:

 - $X \in \mathcal{T}$, i.e. that $X = \bigcup \mathcal{S}$ for some $\mathcal{S} \subseteq \mathcal{C}$, which implies that $\mathcal{C}$ covers $X$.
 - for any $A, B \in \mathcal{C}$, $A \cap B$ \in \mathcal{T}$, so it's a union of sets in $\mathcal{C}



## Homeomorphism basis

I don't know what to call this, the **homeomorphism basis**? If $X$ and $Y$ are spaces and $f: X \to Y$ is a homeomorphism, and $\mathcal{B}$ is a basis for the topology on $X$, then

$$f(\mathcal{B}) := \{f(B) : B \in \mathcal{B}\}$$

is a basis for the topology on $Y$. To prove that $f(\mathcal{B})$ is a basis for the topology on $Y$, it suffices to prove a) that $f(\mathcal{B})$ is a collection of open subsets in $Y$ (which is true by definition), and b) that every $V$ open in $Y$ is the union of sets in $f(\mathcal{B})$, which can be seen by noting that $f^{pre}(V)$ is open in $X$, so $f^{pre}(V) = \bigcup_i B_i$ for some $B_i$'s in $\mathcal{B}$, so $V = \bigcup_i f(B_i)$.

## Second-countable spaces

A space is **second-countable** if it has a countable (finite or countably infinite) basis.

Being second-countable is a topological property. That is, if $X$ and $Y$ are homeomorphic, then $X$ is second-countable iff $Y$ is. This can be immediately seen by using the homeomorphism basis: if we have a countable basis for $X$, then we immediately have one for $Y$ as well.



## Basic separation axioms

### Hausdorff spaces

A sufficient (but not necessary) condition for ensuring uniqueness of limits for sequences in a topological space is the **Hausdorff** property. This property says that any two distinct points in a topological space have disjoint neighborhoods. Any space with this property is called a **Hausdorff space**. This ensures uniqueness of limits since two tail sequences of one sequence could not be contained in two disjoint sets (the smaller of the tail sequences would have to be contained in two disjoint sets, which is clearly not possible).

Hausdorff-ness is a topological property: If $X$ and $Y$ are homeomorphic, then $X$ is Hausdorff iff $Y$ is. To see this, if $f: X \to Y$ is a homeomorphism and $X$ is Hausdorff, for any $u, v \in Y$, then $a := f^{-1}(u)$ and $b := f^{-1}(v)$ are in $X$, so they have neighborhoods $U_x$ and $V_y$, respectively, that are disjoint. Then $f(U_x)$ and $f(V_y)$ are neighborhoods of $u$ and $v$, respectively, and they must be disjoint since if $z = f(c) = f(d)$ for some $c \in U_x, d \in V_y$, then $f$ is not bijective.

TODO: An example of a non-Hausdorff space where limits are unique.

### $T_1$ spaces

Another separation axiom that has come up: A space is $T_1$ if for any pair of distinct points $a$ and $b$, there are neighborhoods $U$ and $V$ of $a$ and $b$, respectively, such that $U$ doesn't contain $b$ and $V$ doesn't contain $a$. Clearly Hausdorff spaces are $T_1$, since they actually impose a stronger condition: that the neighborhoods are *disjoint*.

A space $X$ is $T_1$ iff singleton sets are closed. If $T_1$, for any $x$ and any $y \neq x$, there is a neighborhood $U_y$ of $y$ that does not contain $x$ by the $T_1$ property, so the union of them all is $X - x$ and is open since it is a union of open sets. (Alternate proof: if $\{x\}$ is not closed, there is some $a \neq x$ and every neighborhood of $a$ contains $x$, contradicting $T_1$). Conversely, if all singletons are closed, then for $x \neq y$, $X - x$ is a neighborhood of $y$ and $X - y$ is a neighborhood of $x$, and these mutually exclude each other.

$T_1$ spaces do not necessarily have the unique limits property. TODO: example. Finite complement topology on $\mathbb{N}$?

### A lemma

In a $T_1$ space, if $a$ is a limit point of some subset $S$, then for any neighborhood $U$ of $a$ there must be infinitely many points distinct from $a$ that are in $U \cap S$, because if there are only finitely many, we can find a neighborhood of $a$ that does not intersect $S - a$, contradicting that it's a limit point.


[part-1]: /entries/2015-04-28-topology-1.html
