---
title: Notes on probability, part 5: Discrete random variables
tags: math, probability
---

In [part 3][part3] we had just defined random variables as measurable functions $\Omega \to \mathbb{R}$. But "measurable function" is a pretty technical thing, and it turns out that if we restrict our attention to discrete random variables, analysis is much simplified.

Consider a random variable $X: \Omega \to \mathbb{R}$ such that the image set $\{X(\omega) : \omega \in \Omega\}$ is countable (finite or countably infinite). Such a random variable is called a **discrete random variable**.

With general random variables $X$, the defining characteristic is that the set $\{ X \leq a\}$ is an event for every $a \in \mathbb{R}$. Discrete random variables $X$ actually give you a bit more: that $\{ X = a\}$ is an event for $a \in \mathbb{R}$. This enables one to define a **probability mass function** for any discrete random variable $X$ by

$$p_X: a \mapsto \mathbb{P}(X = a)$$

Due to the properties of the probability measure, we have $p_X(a) \geq 0$ for all $a$ and that

$$\sum_a p_X(a) = 1$$

The simplest example of a random variable is probably an **indicator random variable** $1_A$ for an event $A$, defined by

$$1_A(\omega) := \text{if } \omega \in A \text{ then } 1 \text{ else } 0$$

This is easily seen to be a discrete random variable since the sets $\{1_A = 1\} = A$ and $\{1_A = 0\} = A^c$ are both events.

It may be the case that a random variable $X$ has a [countable][wiki-countable] (finite or countably infinite) image set, in which case the variable is said to be **discrete**. In fact, if $E$ is any countable set (not necessarily a subset of $\mathbb{R}$), then we can take the $\sigma$-algebra on $E$ to be the power set. This is a Borel algebra (the one generated by the discrete topology on $E$), so any measurable $f: \Omega \to E$ is called a **discrete random variable**.

Random variables that are not discrete are called *continuous*. For simplicity we will focus on the discrete case below.

If $X$ is a discrete random variable, let $a_1, a_2, \ldots$ be a numbering of the values that $X$ can take on. Let us further say that $a_k < a_{k+1}$ for all $k$. Then $X^{pre}((- \infty, a_k]) = X^{pre}(\{a_1, \ldots, a_k\}$) is an event for every $k$. Thus

$$X^{pre}(\{a_1, \ldots, a_k\}) - X^{pre}(\{a_1, \ldots, a_{k-1}\}) = X^{pre}(a_k)$$

is also an event. That is, for every value $a_k$ that the random variable $X$ takes on, we can find the probability $\mathbb{P}(X(\omega) = a_k)$. The function defined by

$$a_k \mapsto \mathbb{P}(X(\omega) = a_k)$$

is called the **probability mass function** of $X$. Recall that we supposed, at the start, that $X$ was discrete. Continuous random variables do not have probability mass functions.



[part3]: /entries/2015-05-19-probability-3.html
[wiki-countable]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Countable_set
